# Key Terms

 - **natural rights**: The right to life, liberty, and property; believed to be given by God; no government may take away
 - **state of nature**: A theory on how people might have lived before societies came into existence
 - **due process**: The requirement that government, when dealing with people, have in place a fair procedure which it applies equally to all
 - **social contract**: A powerful, foundational agreement between people and their government in which citizens consent to be governed so long as the government protects their natural rights.
 - **direct democracy**: A form of democracy where people participate personally in making government decisions instead of choosing representatives to do this for them
 - **state of nature**: A theory on how people might have lived before societies came into existence
 - **Declaration of Independence**: The original document, authored principally by Thomas Jefferson, that "birthed" the United States and started the Revolutionary War. It lists important natural rights and grievances against the King of England, as well as declaring independence
 - **Bill of Rights**: Collectively, the first ten amendments to the U.S. Constitution, ratified in 1791; they list citizens' civil liberties and civil rights
 - **bicameral legislature**: A lawmaking body in the legislative branch that consists of two separate chambers or two separately elected groups of officials, such as Senators and Representatives, like the Virginia Plan. Bi, meaning "two," and camera, meaning "chamber," are from Latin.
 - **political ideologies**: A coherent philosophy about the structure, power, and purpose of government. American political ideologies include progressive, liberal, moderate, independent, conservative, and libertarian.
 - **articles of confederation**: The first attempt at organizing the government of the United States, consisting of a unicameral (one-chamber) Congress. Did not permit Congress to tax, regulate foreign or interstate commerce, or enforce its laws. The Articles of Confederation failed as it formed an alliance of sovereign state governments with too weak a national government.
 - **popular vote**: The outcome of a democratic election in which all qualified voters are eligible to participate and the winner is the person who receives the largest number of individual votes.
 - **Virginia Plan**: A plan proposed by the representatives of Virginia at the Constitutional Convention for a two-house (that is, bicameral) legislature, wherein the number of a state's representatives in each chamber would be based on the state's population.
 - **New Jersey Plan**: A plan proposed by the representatives of New Jersey at the Constitutional Convention that called for a one-house national legislature in which each state would have one vote.
 - **three-fifths compromise**: During the creation of the U.S. Constitution, an agreement made between Northern and Southern states that called for counting of all a state's free population and 60 percent of its slave population for the twin purposes of federal taxation and representation in Congress.
 - **veto**: The power of a president to reject a law passed by Congress. Veto is a Latin term meaning "I forbid."
 - **checks and balances**: Extra constitutional powers that allow each branch of government to limit the exercise of power of the other two branches or approve their actions. This system requires different parts of government to work together and find agreement in order to accomplish new official actions.
 - **separation of powers**: The division of a government's powers among three separate branches of government, managed by different groups of people. In the United States, the three branches of government are legislative, executive, and judicial.
 - **federal system**: A form of government in which power is divided between state governments and a national government.
 - **enumerated (express) powers**: Powers given explicitly to the federal government by the Constitution in Article I, Section 8). The enumerated powers are: to regulate interstate and foreign commerce, raise and support armies, declare war, coin money, and conduct foreign affairs.
 - **implied power**: A power not expressly defined in the Constitution but permitted to Congress through a loose interpretation of the Necessary and Proper clause.
 - **inherent power**: Powers of the president or Congress that are neither enumerated nor implied but assumed to exist as a direct result of the country's existence.
 - **reserved powers**: Any powers not prohibited by the Constitution or delegated to the national government; powers reserved to the states and denied to the federal government as outlined in the Tenth Amendment.
 - **concurrent powers**: Powers shared by state and federal governments: to tax, to borrow money, to build infrastructure, to establish courts, to establish legal punishments, and to declare eminent domain.
 - **ratification**: The action of signing or otherwise officially approving a treaty, contract, or agreement, making it legally valid.
 - **republic**: A system of government in which political power is held by the people through their ability to elect representatives who make laws on their behalf.
 - **habeas corpus**: Meaning, in Latin, "show me the body," this is t right for a jailed citizen to appear before a judge to hear about a criminal charge. Habeus corpus prohibits imprisoning people without due process of law.
 - **the federalist papers**: A series of 85 essays written and published by several of the Founding Fathers—Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay—in 1887-88, in favor of ratifying the newly written Constitution.
 - **faction**: Also called an interest group, this is a group of people who gather to petition government for their special concern.
 - **impeachment**: A process for removing government officials suspected of "high crimes and misdemeanors," including judges and even the president; impeachment requires a majority vote in the House of Representatives on articles of impeachment and then the support of two-thirds of the Senate for conviction and removal.
 - **executive orders**: A written direction to a government agency issued by a president in the absence of congressional action to pursue a particular course of action. Generally, such an order changes an existing law and can be subject to challenge through the courts.
 - **bill of attainder**: An act of a legislature, such as Congress, declaring a person guilty of a crime and levying a punishment, without a trial. The U.S. Constitution prohibits Congress from passing any bills of attainder.
 - **oversight**: The right and responsibility of one body or branch of government to review and monitor other bodies; for example, Congress oversees federal agencies and programs which are managed by the executive branch.
 - **committees**: a small set of representatives tasked with considering, researching, introducing, and investigating particular policy areas.
 - **discretionary spending**: In the context of the U.S. budget, pending that can be altered from year to year through the congressional appropriations process, including spending on scientific research, housing assistance, veterans’ health care, education, and transportation.
 - **budget resolution**: A plan for government will receive in revenue and spend over the next fiscal year, including a set of budget priorities and discretionary spending limits.
 - **pork-barrel spending**: spending on often unnecessary local projects that benefit a specific member of Congress's district or state.
 - **line-item veto**: The ability of an executive to reject specific portions of a piece of legislation rather than reject the entire bill. In the United States, most governors have this power, but the power of line-item vetoes for the president has been ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
 - **interstate commerce clause**: One of the enumerated (express) powers of Congress; this is the power to regulate commerce and trade between two or more states.
 - **commerce clause**: One of the enumerated (express) powers of Congress, allowing for regulation of commerce and trade between two or more states and foreign nations.
 - **advice and consent**: A Constitutional power, stating that presidential nominations for executive and judicial posts take effect only when confirmed by the Senate. Also, foreign treaties treaties become official only when the Senate approves them by a two-thirds vote.
 - **supermajority**: Also referred to as an absolute majority, this is any number greater than 50%.
 - **filibuster**: A political procedure conducted by a legislator (in the United States, a senator) to delay or prevent debate on a proposal, usually by holding the floor and speaking continuously, refusing to yield. To break a filibuster, two-thirds of senators present must vote to end it (cloture).
 - **administrative agencies**: Government organizations created by Congress to enforce laws, policies, and government programs. Administrative agencies are organized under the president in the executive branch and collectively employ millions of federal workers.
 - **majority party**: In either the House of Representatives or the Senate—or both, collectively—the political party with more seats.
 - **minority party**: In either the House of Representatives or the Senate—or both, collectively—the political party with fewer seats.
 - **speaker of the house**: In the House of Representatives, the elected leader of the majority party who serves as the chief presiding officer; makes committee assignments, controls the agenda and voting, etc
 - **majority leader**: In the U.S. House of Representatives, second-in-command to the Speaker of the House; both are affiliated with the party with majority control.
 - **minority leader**: the elected leader of the minority party. In the U.S. House of Representatives, the leader of the minority party, elected by the party members in the House.
 - **majority whip**: In either the House of Representatives or the Senate, a leader from the majority political party whose job it is to help coordinate strategy and maintain discipline among the members of the party. The term derives from a hunting term, "whipper-in," whose job is to prevent hounds from wandering away from the pack.
 - **minority whip**: In either the House of Representatives or the Senate, a leader from the minority political party whose job it is to help coordinate strategy and maintain discipline among the members of the party. The term derives from a hunting term, "whipper-in," whose job is to prevent hounds from wandering away from the pack.
 - **president pro tempore**: In the U.S. Senate, the person who serves as the Chief Presiding Officer in the absence of the Vice President; this role is often ceremoniously given to the longest-serving senator of the majority party.
 - **committee**: Small set of representatives or senators tasked with considering, researching, introducing, and investigating particular policy areas.
 - **standing committee**: A permanent committee that exists from session to session for the purpose of researching, writing, and introducing proposed pieces of legislation in a particular policy area.
 - **select committees**: A temporary congressional committee established to investigate a particular issue or policy area not covered by a standing committee.
 - **joint committees**: A committee containing members of both the House of Representatives and the Senate who work together on a particular issue such as economic or tax policies.
 - **conference committees**: a type of joint committee whose job it is to form one unified bill from of different versions of the same piece of legislation passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate to be sent to the President.
 - **rules committee**: In the House of Representatives, a powerful committee that determines the parameters for debate and amendments to a piece of legislation. In the Senate, a similar group, the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration, is less powerful, as it does not set the terms of debate.
 - **cloture**: A procedural mechanism in the U.S. Senate whereby 60 members (three-fifths) of the entire Senate vote to end a filibuster.
 - **gerrymandering**: A word with a colorful origin (Elbridge Gerry, Massachusetts governor, signed a bill in 1812 that created a partisan district in the Boston area that was shaped like a salamander; Gerry + salamander became "gerrymander"), this is the manipulation of political advantage by re-drawing electoral districts, producing districts biased in favor of one particular political party.
 - **redistricting**: Closely aligned to reapportionment, this is the re-drawing of electoral districts to accommodate changes in a state’s population based on the last census with the goal is of creating congressional districts that are as equal as possible in population.
 - **census**: A population count which, in the United States, is constitutionally required every ten years as the first step in congressional reapportionment.
 - **reapportionment**: The once-per-decade process of assigning the House of Representatives' 435 seats to districts in the 50 states according to population, as determined by the most recent U.S. census.
 - **commander-in-chief**: Constitutional power giving the president authority over all parts of the U.S. military, including promoting and dismissing military commanders and officers.
 - **bipartisan**: Meaning "two factions," consensus on a particular government action, issue, or law between both major political parties.
 - **Monroe Doctrine**: A principle of U.S. policy, first articulated by President James Monroe, declaring that interventions by European powers in the affairs of the nations of the Western Hemisphere would be considered as intolerable acts of aggression by the United States.
 - **executive memorandum**: A presidential tool similar to an executive order, used to manage the operations of the various departments and agencies of the federal government.
 - **executive agreements**: Formal accords between leaders of countries that do not need to be confirmed by legislative bodies. In the United States, a president can make such an agreement without ratification by the Senate as a treaty would have to be.
 - **recess appointment**: An appointment of a federal official by the president at a time when the Senate is not in session and is therefore unable to confirm appointments.
 - **civil cases**: Court cases based on civil law, not criminal law. Civil law regulates disagreements between individuals and companies, individuals and government agencies, and foreign individuals or governments, including questions of constitutionality.
 - **judicial review**: A principle that courts have the power to overturn laws passed by Congress and even actions of the president if such laws or actions conflict with the Constitution. This power was established in the case Marbury v. Madison.
 - **stare decisis**: Meaning “let the decision stand,” this is a principle that courts should rely on previous decisions and established precedents as they make decisions.
 - **judicial activism**: A viewpoint that U.S. courts should defend individual rights and liberties and stop actions by other branches of government that they see as infringing on those rights.
 - **strict constructionist**: An approach to interpreting the Constitution based on the idea that the national government can only do those things which are specifically mentioned in the Constitution.
 - **loose construction**: An approach to interpreting the Constitution based on the idea that judges can reinterpret constitutional language to create new legal standards, appropriate for changing conditions.
 - **judicial restraint**: A viewpoint that judges should be reluctant to overturn the acts of Congress, the President, or the states, deferring decisions (and thus, policymaking) to elected branches of government. Proponents of judicial restraint focus on a narrow, strict interpretation of the Bill of Rights.
 - **common law**: The form of law that is based on custom, precedent, and court decisions in England, rather than on legislative decree.
 - **federalism**: A system and structure of government that divides constitutional power and authority between the national government and state governments.
 - **elastic clause**: A clause in the U.S. Constitution, formally known as the Necessary and Proper clause, that can be "stretched" to allow Congress to make laws on policies beyond those listed (or "enumerated") powers. "Stretching" this clause produces what are termed "implied powers."

